Hi. We're back with Thomas John,
a Quantitative Portfolio Manager,
to talk about AI and finance.
So Thomas, based on your experience,
how is AI applied in quant finance today?
To be honest, not a whole lot yet.
Only the largest firms are applying AI in any form directly,
although many might be consuming it indirectly.
For example, in the form of a data stream that might have been
constructed by a vendor using some machine learning technique.
The flip side of that is great news for aspiring quants who wanted to use AI.
There's a lot of unchartered territory to explore and contribute to.
Another favorable tailwind is that
financial firms are far more keen than earlier for investing in machine learning,
regardless of where they stand on the spectrum of skepticism of the utility of AI.
Most are making a concerted effort
to integrate machine learning into various parts of their business.
Large firms on the buy side,
like Blackrock and on the sell side like JP Morgan and Goldman Sachs,
are hiring people with expertise in machine learning for working on
topics ranging from liquidity analysis to execution algorithms.
So applications of AI in
quant finance are not limited to systematic investment departments alone.
An entirely separate area from traditional investment management consists of
fintech firms that are investing in AI and
seek to disrupt the traditional firms altogether.
Yet another way of thinking about this question
is that it might become irrelevant in a few years.
AI will just be an integral part of every industry,
including quant finance, and it won't be something to remark about at all.
Interesting. So Thomas, what else is important to know
other than AI and machine learning if you want to be a successful quant?
We can talk about quant requirements,
but one big thing to understand is that
you need to have some knowledge of finance itself.
Of course, finance is a vast area,
an ocean, and you aren't expected to have expertise in a lot of it.
But you want to have shown a taste for swimming in that ocean in
order to get a job and then as you work,
you gain more and more domain knowledge.
For example, if you're interviewing with the derivatives group,
you are expected to know a fair amount about options,
how they work, what they're sensitive to.
Likewise, with a bond trading group to know basic bond math and terminologies,
such as duration, convexity, spread.
This isn't too hard to do.
There are books that can help you prepare for this.
John Hulls book on Options,
Futures and Other Derivatives is a classic.
There are other such books.
Do try to know the information and solve problems post in those books.
There are even books discussing the kind of questions you can expect in quant interviews.
You can use them to get a good sense of what to expect.
Great. Thank you. So Thomas,
is there a trade off between
complex black-box models and the simple but explainable linear models?
Some of the main differences between typical applications of
AI or machine learning in the tech space versus investments,
is that the signal to noise ratio is much lower in asset pricing forecasting.
The data is highly non-stationary and
the sample size available is small, relatively speaking.
Plus, when you act on the forecasts,
that in turn impacts prices and changes the dynamics of what you are predicting,
at least to some extent,
depending on the size of your trades.
Adding to this uncertainty in forecast is
the fact that in the case of large-scale asset management,
significant things like pensions are at stake.
For these reasons, a majority of investors prefer interpretable models for investing,
so that they can know for themselves and explain to
their clients the reasons behind any under performance,
resulting from the use of a given model.
In the news, you can encounter firms talking about
how they might have had a better performing black-box model,
but prefer to use the more readily interpretable one.
There are exceptions to this.
There are some investors who are willing to risk the black box nature of
the model in order to get access to new or different forecasts,
and so invest in pure AI based strategies with
exceptional performance or very high Sharpe ratio high frequency algorithms.
This debate exists in other areas also and it depends very much on applications.
Many had taken the position that interpretability is not the important thing,
performance is and this debate has existed for a long time.
You can see this discussed as a well-developed debate even, for example,
back in 2001 in Breiman's discussion of the two cultures in statistical modeling.
In recent times too,
some have argued that in some applications,
like serving ads on a social media platform,
people may not really need to know or even want to understand
all about the inner workings of the models as long as performance is good.
Others have pushed back with examples in medical fields
or elsewhere where causality is important,
that interpretability is important.
Even within a single field really,
it comes down to the particular application.
Great. Thanks so much for sharing your insights.